In December 1992, a tailback of second-hand Toyota Corollas, Ford Escorts and Fiat Mirafioris, the cars of a middle-income country, snaked its way from a supermarket car park in Northern Ireland to the border of the Irish Republic. On the northern side, bemused British soldiers patrolling their watchtowers weren't sure what was going on. The Irish police, the Gardaí, on the southern side, knew fine well what the story was. Some of their colleagues were in the queue.

It was Christmas, booze was cheaper in Northern Ireland than in the Republic of Ireland, Irish people like to drink and December is party time. The queues this year were longer than usual. Traditionally, the booze arbitrage was exploited by people close to the border. But in 1992, thousands more were desperate to spend their Irish punts. We were witnessing a run on a currency triggered by rumours of an imminent devaluation. Spooked, people wanted to spend and buying beer was a way for ordinary people to hedge exchange rate risk. Buy cheap British beer today, with the expense of Irish money, before it too becomes cheap.

There is no more damning vote of no confidence in a currency than your own people rushing for the exit. A currency collapse proceeds in stages. Initially, it's bankers, financiers and speculators who become fidgety. By the time teachers, nurses, police officers and plumbers are trying to stock up on cheap booze, it's all over.

In the Ireland of 1992, we were observing a run on a relatively new type of money, a currency backed by nothing other than the promise of the state. By then, the whole world was using this type of money, which economists call fiat money. The key difference between fiat money and money backed by a commodity, for example gold, is that fiat money is legal tender, made legal by the authority of the state alone.

That year, I witnessed from the inside what happens when people lose faith in a currency. The experience of working in a central bank has guided my thinking on money, monetary policy and monetary economics ever since. Less than two decades after its currency crisis, Ireland, along with much of the Western world, experienced a devastating banking crash. The same gang in the central banks was in charge, and within 16 years, they had managed to preside over two massive monetary crises, suggesting that their grasp of what money is and how it works might not be that solid.

The Irish central bankers were not alone. They were part of a greater club, a global priesthood. Could this entire worldwide clerisy be wrong about money? As a young economist, I didn't quite appreciate that the world was entering a new relationship with money. We were entering the age of the technocrats, modern day high priests. When a central bank is bestowed with the extraordinary ability to create money, the people who run these places wield enormous power. Unlike politicians, the technocrats are not accountable to the electorate. Take for example the European Central Bank. It is entirely independent, yet utterly political. Because money drives the economy, and the economy drives the political cycle, money is, by definition, political.

Now don't get me wrong, the era of fiat money has produced the most extraordinary prosperity. In the 1970s, for example, 40% of the world's population lived under the World Bank's poverty line. Today, that figure is 10%. But fiat money is also a great illusion, and, being based on trust, it is a source of fragility as well as a source of strength.

At the centre of the system are the central bankers, who claim to control money. But do they really? When trying to understand money, a key aspect to comprehend is the difference between currency and finance. Today, currency, such as cash in your pocket, amounts to around 10% of all the money out there. Finance, on the other hand, in all its manifestations, for example your mortgage, makes up the rest.

When you go to a bank and you ask for a loan for a car, the bank creates the money out of nothing. It puts it into your account. And this new money didn't exist yesterday. It has been created not by the central banker's currency, but by the commercial bank as finance. This money, or credit, is the lubricant of finance, and it's governed by contracts. Finance is not determined by the central bank. It is an energy that can propel the economy and the society, sometimes off its axis, from boom to bust.

So when talking about the fiat regime, economists have typically contended that the central bank creates the money, prints it and gives it to the commercial banks, which then push the money into the economy. This interpretation places the central bank at the centre of the system, determining how much money is in circulation. It is the story economists learn in university. Let's call it the push story. The amount of money the economy requires is determined by the all-knowing high priests, using complex economic models. When you read about the US Federal Reserve in the media, you are reassured that this institution has its hand on the monetary tiller.

But I'm not sure that that's how the system actually operates. Having seen various crises, where the central bank is not only not in charge, but doesn't appear to have a clue what's going on, I believe money works the opposite way. Let's call this the pull story, where the central bank is not pushing money into the economy, but is actually being pulled by the economy and the economy's appetite for money, which is whetted and served by the commercial banks.

The commercial banks, as in the case of you buying a car a minute ago, create money out of nothing. They are given a licence by the central bank to do so, but the central bank doesn't control them. What it does is it sets targets, it sets standards, but it doesn't actually control them. And ultimately the central bank is pulled by the economy's appetite for money, rather than pushing the money into the system.

And this is why central bankers sit around trying to set the rate of interest, because the rate of interest is the price of money. But the central bankers can only, like any monopolist in any area of economics, they can either set the price or the quantity, but not both. So the price of money is set by the central bankers, but the quantity of money is set by the commercial bankers who act independently.

The central bankers are therefore guessing what direction the economy and the money supply might take, and the financial markets are speculating on that guesswork, and the media is speculating on the financial markets, so everybody is speculating on the guesswork of others. Which isn't exactly reassuring, is it? Can the central bankers control finance and its role in the economy? Not really, and this is why, when things go wrong, it is the central bankers who are left carrying the can and looking stupid because they didn't control the game in the first place.

So when you ask yourself, why do we have recurring banking and financial crisis? This is the answer. The people in charge are not in charge. And behind all the central banking pomp and ceremony, there are mortal humans dealing with that most incendiary of substances, money.

How is money likely to evolve from here? Well, like language, money has always been a living thing, and like the adoption of a new word, each monetary innovation has made money more useful. So while social media and Wall Street were going on about crypto, a far more compelling form of money was emerging, organically, in an unlikely region.

In much of Africa, a major impediment to development is a lack of credit and banking. Many, particularly rural Africans, rarely see a bank in their day-to-day lives, but they do have mobile phones. In 2007, the same year Bitcoin arrived, a more ingenious currency called M-Pesa was being introduced, with little fanfare or investment. M-Pesa, M is for mobile and Pesa is Swahili for money, turns mobile phone credit into money. It is a bottom-up adaptation that responded to a real demand and solved a real problem.

On street corners in Kenya, you'll see hawkers selling pay-as-you-go mobile phone airtime. They are agents of an incipient monetary and social transformation. Using basic text messaging technology, M-Pesa allows Kenyans to deposit money on their phones, buy and sell using the debit and credit function on their phones, transfer money on their phones, and borrow and save through phone credit. Safaricom, the country's leading mobile phone provider, undertook to cash mobile phone minutes for the local currency. This move allowed mobile phone minutes to become currency, with commercial banks facilitating the exchange.

In rural Kenya, small loans are extended to tide farmers over from harvest to harvest, not unlike the putting-out system described in the early medieval period. The money loaned is phone credit, whose value is understood by everyone. Once poorer people accessed this basic banking tool, phone-based money took off. Before M-Pesa, the way to send money home to the Kenyan countryside was to give cash to a bus driver who would charge up to 30% of its value to deliver to a remote village, and often the money simply disappeared. With M-Pesa, the money is transferred via phone credit, and the phone credit is then used to buy supplies in the local shop. No bus driver, no risk.

Right now, there are 50,000 registered agents acting as tiny banks all over Kenya, and 70% of the population use M-Pesa, while 30% of the country's GDP is generated via M-Pesa. This is real monetary innovation.

Today our advanced civilisation has electric cars, smartphones, nuclear weapons, vaccines, contraceptive pills, artificial intelligence, takeaway Tandooris and global supply chains, plus 8 billion of us manage to live on this crowded planet. Such feats of organisation, productivity, innovation and collective brain power are not enabled by ideology or religion or force, but by money. Money acts as the central nervous system of that highly complicated, always adapting organism we call the global economy. It is the defining technology of humanity.

M-Pesa is the embodiment of money's evolution, spontaneously adapting and thriving in response to its environment. Who would have predicted that mobile phones would become banks and phone credit would become money? The evolution of money, like the evolution of humanity, constantly surprises.