In September 1922, a young journalist crossed the Rhine from the French city of Strasbourg to Kiel, the neighbouring German town. Based in Paris, he was writing for the Toronto Star. In his soon-to-be-famous matter-of-fact style, Ernest Hemingway explained to his readers the reality of a society where money is destroyed.

When he arrived in Strasbourg, he noticed that nobody was selling German marks. On the German side, he changed 10 francs, less than one Canadian dollar, for 670 marks which, and I quote, lasted me and Mrs Hemingway for a day of heavy spending and we still had marks left at the end. The writer tells of witnessing an elderly German gentleman who couldn't afford to buy an apple for only 12 marks.

Hemingway summed up the dilemma of the majority of Germans in 1922 who were dependent on wages or pensions and who had put their savings into government bonds. Their livelihood was being destroyed by hyperinflation. If on the other hand, you could get your hands on foreign currency, even a German could live like a king. Hemingway observed, the miracle of exchange makes a swinish spectacle where the youth of the town of Strasbourg crowd into a German pastry shop to eat themselves sick.

Hemingway was witnessing a society destroying its money and breaking one of the fundamental bonds between the state and its citizens. You save your money and we will protect it. That civic responsibility was forced to be abandoned in the opening years of the Weimar Republic as Germany descended into one of the most destructive episodes of monetary self-harm in history. In the most successful economy in Europe, how was it possible that an elderly gentleman couldn't afford the price of an apple?

In 1914, Imperial Germany decided to pay for the First World War by borrowing from its citizens. Confident in victory, Germany exchanged people's savings for IOUs, which offered generous interest rates. And right up to the end, the German people thought they were winning the war and that they would all be paid back.

After the war, the new Weimar Republic was born saddled with enormous war debts. At Versailles, there was little appetite for forgiveness. Britain and France wanted the new Germany to be punished for the crimes of the old Germany. Meanwhile, America wanted Germany to pay so that it could recoup the loans that it had extended to the other Allies. In 1914, Britain was the world's banker, but the US emerged after the war as the world's undisputed creditor. This global shift in the power of money, from London to New York, would define the world's monetary relations for the next century.

During the general election campaign of 1918, Prime Minister Lloyd George promised to squeeze defeated Germany like a lemon until the pips squeak. It was inconceivable that the German economy, home of pre-war probity, discipline and order, wouldn't recover. But Germany's situation had changed profoundly, politically, socially and monetarily.

In 1920, Germany faced enormous reparation bills. The Versailles Settlement required that Germany transfer 5% of its GDP to foreign powers every single year. So this means, in practical terms, that the country must transfer real goods out of the economy. Empty shelves always put pressure on prices, but when produce is taken out of the economy, there is also a loss of indirect tax, such as VAT. The German state was obliged to pay reparations in gold, and the consequent sale of marks put ongoing downward pressure on the currency. The government, hemmed in on all sides, was too fragile to raise taxes. So instead, Berlin borrowed from its own central bank to pay its own producers for goods that would never be sold in Germany.

As a result, Germany faced a shortage of goods in its shops. And, as the government was subsidising German manufacturers for goods that the French would never pay for, it also suffered from a massive build-up of government debt, which added enormously to the economic jitters. Foreign politics made things even worse, since the liberal Weimar government also committed itself to social reform, expanding spending on health and public housing. The government couldn't renege on its international obligations, nor could it revoke its domestic political promises. To cover these national commitments, it began to print more and more money.

The more the currency jumped around, the more people became nervous. Money flowed in and out of Germany, depending on rumour and counter-rumour. In January 1923, using Germany's unwillingness to pay reparations in kind as an excuse, French and Belgian troops occupied the Ruhr, Germany's industrial heartland. In the Ruhr, German workers went on general strike in response, while some large German companies called for a mass campaign of civil disobedience.

The French reacted. On the 13th of February, a young German woman called Josephine Malakert was gang-raped by French sailors, and throughout the spring, incidences of rape of German women increased. Germany united against the occupation, citing the abuse of its people in the hope that it might pressurise the international community to persuade the French to end the occupation. For the Weimar Republic, financing passive resistance was a price worth paying.

But the cause of this showdown was German hyperinflation and the destruction of money. Millions of hard-working, middle-class, tax-paying, government-trusting Germans saw their savings wiped out. Teachers, civil servants, policemen, doctors, clerks, people who had bought the supposedly cast-iron war bonds were now hung out to dry. In contrast, people who owned physical assets, such as landlords, farmers and industrialists, didn't suffer so much as the value of their property adjusted upwards with inflation. And at the very bottom, hyperinflation didn't change your position very drastically either, because you had no savings to lose in the first place. Plus, the fear of communism meant that workers' wages more or less kept up with inflation. It was those in the middle, the political ballast of society, who suffered most.

After the hyperinflation, people would want somebody to blame. One man was positioning himself and his party to benefit from this social catastrophe. In November 1923, just as hyperinflation peaked, Adolf Hitler led a failed Munich beer-keller Putsch. Although spectacularly ineffective, the public stand against Weimar would allow Hitler to paint himself as the heroic father-figure, an inspired leader who was ready to serve time in prison for his convictions. Hitler, witness to the 1923 chaos, understood the opportunity presented when money dies. It was a lesson he would not forget, teaching him that money is a weapon like no other.

Years later, at the height of the Second World War, Hitler planned for the Luftwaffe to drop millions of fake pounds over Britain. While some honest citizens might go directly to the authorities, he worked on the assumption that most folk would stuff a few notes under the mattress. By bringing this counterfeit money into circulation, inflation would rip through the system. The cascade of new money would drive British prices skyward, triggering panic. Hitler hoped that the previously obedient British would experience a fire-in-the-theatre moment. They'd freak out, and the ensuing chaos would upend their blitz spirit, compromising the war effort.

In August 1943, Salomon Smolianoff, once a fine portrait painter as well as a Weimar Berlin nightclub operator, found himself in the hell of Sachsenhausen concentration camp. Under 93594, Smolianoff had a reputation that preceded him. In a bizarre quirk of fate, one that saved his life, an SS officer called Hans Kruger, who had previously arrested Smolianoff as part of a criminal crackdown in Berlin, was put in charge of Hitler's top-secret mass forgery scheme. Kruger the Nazi knew he needed Smolianoff the Jew, the expert forger.

Smolianoff now found himself the de facto leader of a motley crew of 142 Jewish specialists extracted from concentration camps around the Third Reich. These men had once been civilian printers, dyers, fine artists, engineers, engravers, metal workers, mathematicians and photographers. They became the crack counterfeiting team tasked with breaking the Bank of England.

Smolianoff's life and those of the rest of the team depended on figuring out what material the English were using for their banknotes. After relentless testing and tearing up of real English notes, the counterfeiters twigged that the English were using rags from old clothing that had been pulped. With this knowledge, their operation could begin. Initially, the secret workshop made limited amounts of five-pound notes. These prototypes needed to be tested, and where better to test the forgeries than the Bank of England itself?

A German industrialist presented himself at a Swiss bank in Zurich, claiming he had received some English notes on the black market and asked the bank to vouch for their legitimacy. The Swiss officials went to work with magnifying glasses and high-powered lamps and declared the notes were legitimate. Kruger was elated, as too was his boss Heinrich Himmler, the head of the SS.

The counterfeiters' printing presses went into overdrive. The realisation of Hitler's plan to flood Britain with fake banknotes, forgeries so brilliant not even the Bank of England could detect them, was mere months away. The concentration camp forgers printed a total of £134,611,000 which amounted to four out of every ten pounds then in circulation.

The original plan had been for German bombers to drop the notes over Britain, but by late 1943 the war situation had deteriorated for Germany and the Luftwaffe could no longer provide the planes. Undeterred, the SS had other plans. Germany at this stage was running out of hard currency. The Reichmark wasn't accepted for settling trades on the international market. Sterling was another story. As it was the global reserve currency, the SS could use the forged sterling to buy much-needed war materials and, in the process, line their own pockets.

Sachsenhausen's brilliant forgeries infiltrated the global money supply via a network of middlemen who laundered cash for Berlin. The dying months of the Nazi regime led to a black market in passports, visas and new identities, and a thriving market in stolen goods. Reports to the Bank of England that lots of sterling notes were being used by Nazis aroused suspicion. For example, the ransom for the kidnapped Mussolini was paid for in counterfeited sterling.

At the end of the war, the Bank of England oversaw the destruction of these notes, but so worried was the Old Lady of Threadneedle Street about the quality of the forgeries that it retired all its old £5 notes and introduced an entirely new batch. Just think what might have happened had Hitler's money fallen from the heavens in 1943.