BBC Sounds. Music, radio, podcasts.

In the summer of 1185, a young man stood on the quay where the Black Death would, years later, slip silently into Europe. The Sicilian port of Messina was a hub of international trade. North African merchants hawked Eastern spices and saffron heading west. The local wheat, bound for Europe to the north, shared the same quay with leathers and ceramics on their way south.

As the Arab merchants bargained, our young man, Leonardo of Pisa, was listening intently while they ran rings around the most experienced merchants from Genoa, regarded then as Europe's sharpest. The Arabs could count in their heads. Leonardo could see that while mental arithmetic was beyond the ability of Europe's most studious scholars, the average Arab date-seller could calculate weights, ratios and prices with lightning-quick accuracy. Precision with numbers gave the Arabs the edge.

Where did they learn this magic? The secret Saracen tool was mathematics. Anchoring this new way of thinking was the concept of zero, which allowed the Arabs to count in large numbers, to conceive of balance sheets with positive and negative numbers, and to use an amazing tool, algebra, derived from the 8th century Arab mathematician al-Khwarizmi. These advantages put the Arabs on a different commercial footing to their European competitors. While European traders relied on the clumsy abacus, the Arabs displayed extraordinary mental agility that allowed them to express an amount of figs or raisins in terms of an amount of corn or nutmeg. They accepted various coins from places like Alexandria and Cyprus and gave back change in the local Sicilian currency without missing a beat.

Leonardo's father was a Pisan official based in Bejaia, in modern-day Algeria, and this upbringing exposed Leonardo to Arab educators. While his contemporaries in Italy were learning scriptures and Virgil, he was learning an entirely new language and a technology, algebra, and armed with this knowledge, Leonardo of Pisa, better known as Fibonacci, would change the face of European mathematics and set out a new template for sophisticated balance sheet management and bookkeeping. Innovations like these would drive a new era of commercialism, wealth creation and, ultimately, the patronage of the arts that was the basis for the Renaissance. It might not be too far a stretch to say that without Leonardo da Pisa, there might not be any Leonardo da Vinci.

Embraced to revolutionary effect by the Arabs, the concept of zero had been rejected by Christians and the philosophies that Christianity was based on. Zero was the void, and Greek philosophy refuted the void. The West avoided zero for centuries, with enormous negative consequences for science, commerce, accountancy, and a host of other daily activities. But while Europe and Christianity turned their back on zero, the Hindu civilization of India had no such qualms, and it was from them that the conquering Arabs learnt about it.

Zero allows us to go from positive numbers to negative numbers. If your mathematics is based on counting kings, as it was for the Greeks, it's hard to imagine going below zero or through zero into negative numbers. Even today, the concept of negative numbers is difficult for children to wrap their heads around. Ask any primary school teacher, and they will concur that children find it confusing initially. For the Greeks and subsequent Christian thinkers, maths was real, not abstract. You teach a child that one and one is two, holding one apple in one hand and another apple in another hand. Putting them together, you have two. Likewise, for the ancient Christians, two cows were something they could get their heads around, but a negative two cows? That was far more difficult.

There is one place where the concept of zero and less than zero makes complete sense when talking about money. Creditors have money, positive numbers, and debtors owe money, negative numbers. Another attribute of zero is that it can be used as a placeholder. Without zero, how do you represent large numbers like a million, and how do you subtract, add, divide and multiply them? In practical terms, zero propelled the ancient world into the digital age, a world of modern numerals, big numbers, precision and empiricism, with enormous ramifications for money and commerce.

In 1202, the man we know as Fibonacci published Liber Abaci, the Book of Calculations, in which he set out algebraic principles that essentially enabled merchants to make money. Liber Abaci became the go-to book for traders and an essential tool for international commerce. Revelatory as well as revolutionary, it explained how to calculate interest rates, how to circumvent the church's usury laws, apportion profits and assess revenues and costs. It gave merchants a roadmap to express their produce in terms of somebody else's products, in fractions and in a common currency.

One of Fibonacci's most influential insights concerned the relationship between money and time. He teased out what economists call the time value of money, the financial equivalent of, it's better to have an egg today than a chicken tomorrow. This idea underpins all borrowing and lending. It's what we call opportunity cost. If I lend to you, you have the money and I can't use it, so there is a cost to me. The money I earn back from you after you pay me back must be adjusted for the opportunity that I have foregone. The way to calculate this is to divide all the money I get back from you by the prevailing interest rate, which is what I would have got had I simply kept the money on deposit.

In the Middle Ages, giving money a value over time was revolutionary. Fibonacci's clarity brought these ideas to both the merchant class and the banking class, and it led inexorably to their combination, the merchant banker. God-fearing Florentines initially banned Arabic numerals, but by the end of the 13th century Hindu-Arabic mathematics was so popular that over a thousand pupils in Florence were attending special Reckoning schools. The Harvard MBAs of the 14th century were based on the transformative mathematics of Fibonacci, and notable pupils included Niccolò Machiavelli and Leonardo da Vinci.

From 1250 to 1300 the population of Florence grew from around 20,000 to 100,000. The transformation of Florence from a small provincial town into the cradle of the Renaissance was forged by a period of intense financial and civic innovation. A model state, a centre of commerce, learning and beauty, Florence was a merchant city, amongst the first of its kind. It is difficult to overstate how different such a city-state was from the prevailing mode of feudal rule by aristocrats, the church and warrior knights. Florence evolved as a sort of bourgeois democracy, run by elected merchants and their financiers.

In 1252 the Florentine merchants decided to innovate financially, pooling their resources to mint their own currency, the 25-carat gold florin. Financially the florins became the symbol of Florentine power, a credible coin backed by the wealth of the Republic, which Europe could trust, and in time this credibility resulted in the florin becoming Europe's reserve currency.

As merchant power expanded, a showdown between god and mammon became increasingly likely. The business schools, while still reserved for the children of the well-off, changed the way people were educated. Education was no longer the preserve of the humanities, with monks leading the way. The numerical world, mediated by money, was inconsistent with the teachings of the church, mediated by scripture. Money was propelling Europe out of darkness and into the Renaissance light.

At the same time, there was another important financial development taking place in Florence – the emergence of banking. Merchant banking evolved as a natural sequence to the putting-out system, the medieval term for lending to farmers to tide them over between sowing and harvesting. It didn't require a great leap of imagination to start lending money directly for investment purposes. Instead of physically transferring coins between banks, a letter of credit was issued – and, hey presto, we have the origin of the cheque and the chequebook. If you trusted the bank to be good for the credit, then these pieces of paper were as good as money.

A first cousin of the letter of credit was the bill of exchange, which became a sort of international tradable currency, allowing the mercantile system to flourish exponentially. The Florentine banks evolved, alongside those in Genoa, Naples, Milan and Venice, into the area of credit creation by moving to what economists now call fractional reserve banking. So named because the banker only needs to keep a fraction of his reserves to cover the possibility that a depositor wants their money back. And in this way, the banker uses the rest of the money on deposit to create loans, and the growth of credit is exponential.

This development in the evolution of money is like moving from the plough to the steam engine. Finance, making money out of thin air, began to shift power in society from the king to the merchant. Not even the devastation of the Black Death in 1348 could dent the extraordinary development of Florence. In the century after the plague, the city basked in the astonishing intellectual, artistic and commercial genius of Cosimo de' Medici, Leonardo da Vinci and Michelangelo. Cerebral brilliance was allied with artistic virtuosity and anchored by the economic muscularity of the merchant class, creating an entirely new model for political power.

This alliance would lead to a questioning of everything that had gone before, and would usher in the Renaissance, followed by the Reformation and the Enlightenment. A new map of Europe was emerging, with Italy at the centre, and Florence one of the jewels in the crown. But it didn't happen by accident. The catalyst that drove the merchants forward was money, and in particular, bank-created money. Money was moving commerce from the physical to the abstract. Mere paper, backed by a bank's reputation, was as valuable as the florin in itself, backed by gold. We were moving into a different world.